[Music]
foreign the reason that somebody gets
angry at somebody else is because they
haven't gotten angry by themselves they
haven't it takes them a while to build
that kind of anger so go release your
anger and then talk to the person go get
really really scared and then talk to
your boss about the race that you want
you have the emotional experience and
then go take the action
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
foreign
[Music]
many of us are taught to manage our
feelings and to be logical especially
when it comes to important or complex
matters and what makes feeling so
important
that is a great question
um so in a I think it's a 2012 book
called Descartes error and
neuroscientist talks about what happens
to people if they lose the emotional
Center of their brain
and it's a little more complex than this
but just to simplify it if I took the
emotional Center of your brain out you
would cease to make decisions it would
take you
a half an hour to decide what color pen
to use
it would take you four hours to decide
where to have lunch
and though your IQ would maintain the
same in fact in the book there's
somebody whose IQ Remains the Same very
high level IQ is incredibly intelligent
but their business follows the part
their marriage falls apart everything
falls apart because they can't make
decisions and what it indicates to us is
that
we are
thinking we're making rational decisions
but there's really no such thing there's
only emotional decisions and you can
think about this in in your in terms of
your own life really simply
just think about how many decisions of
your life were made because you didn't
want to feel like a failure or how many
decisions were made so that you could
feel loved
how many decisions were made so that you
could feel like you were seen by your
friends and how many decisions were made
so that you
wouldn't be rejected tremendous amounts
huge swaths of our decision making you
can immediately see your are very
emotional
the intellect is really good at trying
to figure out how to get to an end
but the end that you're trying to get to
is always an emotional end and so
Clarity doesn't come from being logical
because it doesn't work you can't do it
in your decision making it comes from
being okay with whatever emotional state
arises
if you all of a sudden are completely
excited to deal with sadness and you're
completely excited to deal with
joy and you're completely excited to
deal with deal with anger it's not even
deal with it's like you get to you get
to live that
then all of a sudden you're you have
incredibly clear decision making
and so that's why it's important and if
you're in those thoughts that are
recursive and they're just coming in
over and over and over and over and over
again
guaranteed there's an emotional reality
that if you felt it it would clear up
can you give me an example of what
you're talking about yeah absolutely so
I'll give you for instance so I work
with a lot of married couples and what
happens in a lot of marriages is that
people stop being true to themselves
because they're scared of some results
that'll happen if they do and eventually
the marriage becomes
not palatable because they're not
themselves in the marriage
and what I tell people in that situation
is hey go mourn the heck out of your
marriage like your marriage is over just
assume it and go mourn the heck out of
it like feel all the grief of being left
to feel all the grief of 20 years down
the tubes feel all the grief that your
kids are gonna not have two parents like
go through all of that stuff and
at the end of that
then then let's find out what you need
to do
and what they do is they're basically
living through the result that they
don't want to feel
so that they can act with clarity
and so it's that feeling of loss that
they don't want to deal with and since
they don't want to deal with it they're
not speaking their truth and therefore
they're not in a marriage that accepts
their truth
and eighty percent of the time they then
speak their truth in the other person is
like great
or they're like what the hell and then
three months later they're like great
twenty percent of the time their partner
is like no that's not what I want they
leave and they break up
but it's definitely a lot higher chance
of success if somebody has already felt
the thing they're trying to avoid
because then their actions don't come
from trying to avoid the feeling their
actions come from what they want
um and this is something that you learn
you know in even like the Tibetan book
of living and dying the
um the samurai did this I think it was a
sophist who did this
many Traditions have done this thing
where they basically visualize their own
death to get over the fear of death so
they've lived that fear so many times
that they no longer fear death
so it's confronting the emotional
reality that you don't want to handle
that you don't want to feel and then
immediately your decision making can
clear up yeah recognizing that there is
life on the other side of that emotion
yeah exactly or that emotion is a deep
friend right there's no there's no
emotion I've run into that hasn't been a
benefit to me so what do you what do you
mean by feeling these emotions if
something hasn't happened yet for
example how do you actually feel
the emotion associated with it to mourn
the loss the first thing you need to do
is just recognize that there's always an
emotional movement in your body it's
constant there's no moment of
Consciousness where there isn't an
emotional reality happening
we might not want to admit it we might
have been taught at a young age not to
feel it but it's constantly occurring
and it's very muscular in nature so you
can really feel it through constriction
of muscles if somebody has been
told never to get angry their bodies
contorts and so I can literally look at
somebody and recognize if there's
repressed anger
um you can recognize and I'm not the
only one there's tons of people can you
can recognize who had the critical
parent who was beaten who's holding back
their authenticity all based on muscular
structure
so the muscles and the emotions are
tightly tightly correlated
um so that's the most important thing to
know that it's constantly happening and
that there's a muscular component to it
how do you feel these emotions well
you're you're feeling them the question
isn't how do you the question is how do
you
bring your awareness into it
so oftentimes what happens is we're
feeling the emotion but we're spending a
lot of energy compressing that emotion
and so it's making it
um a different version of itself the way
I think about this is that there's this
emotionless called the emotion of anger
and it's flowing like a garden hose
and if you kink it one way the anger
looks like this
no I'm not angry and if you kink it
another way it looks like this oh yeah
that's fine
I mean if you're going to be a prick and
if you kink it another way it sounds
like this you son of a Bubba Bubba you
goddamn blah blah blah blah
all of those are kinks in the garden
hose when there's no kinks in that
garden hose when it's fully allowed
there's no reason to resist the anger it
sounds like the anger of a Gandhi or
Martin Luther King it's clear it's
determined it's we will not put up with
this we will be equal that's that's also
anger but that's anger unresisted
so the trick isn't to feel it in the way
that it's like you have to go and
conjure it because it's there it's
really to stop restricting it it's
really to stop holding it down
hmm yeah it sounds like one of one of
the things you were saying is that the
the first thing that people might feel
is actually the the resistance to the
anger like the this body tension for
example might be the first thing you
notice be like Oh I'm feeling a lot of
tension in my body right now and then
maybe the secondary thing you might feel
is like I'm holding back this emotion
right yeah it's the resistance that's
actually painful right so when people
are like I don't want to feel sadness so
there's this way in which people talk
about each of the emotions and there's
this common fear of each of them to let
them fully ride right if I allow my
anger I will destroy people I will hurt
myself I will hurt others if I allow my
sadness it will go on forever and I will
be enveloped in sadness for the rest of
my life if I allow fear I will be Frozen
and I won't be able to act
these are the like traditional thought
processes that people have about why
these emotions aren't safe right and the
reason that they feel that way is
because that's how the resistance is
when you're resisting anger you do
destroy
and when you are resisting sadness it
does last forever it looks like
depression
and when you're resisting fear then
you're anxious all the time and you are
frozen you're not doing stuff so people
have confused the resistance with the
emotion or with the feeling of being
overtaken by the feelings exactly you're
never overtaken by the feelings you're
overtaken by the resistance to the
feelings and if you're scared of an
emotion you are currently being
overtaken by the resistance of the
feeling right yeah because the
resistance is itself a Feeling
it's like a secondary and secondary
feeling that Loops back and then fights
the first feeling which is just a
massive waste of energy
correct it's really important to
recognize that it is a waste of energy
and it's also really important to
recognize that it in itself also isn't
bad and it is there to be loved
I have a saying it says if you can't
love the emotion love the resistance to
the emotion if you make the resistance
the next
the next evil thing that you have to
overcome that's another form of
resistance so you're just adding a
triple layer of resistance on it what
about the danger of like if you if you
have for example you have anger and it's
deeply resisted and you remove the first
layer of resistance and you start to let
the anger through but there's still
enough resistance around it that it
comes out as an attack like it can be
dangerous to be overtaken by like to let
ourselves be partially overtaken by a
feeling and you know still have it
constricted in that way right yeah it
absolutely can you've got you're playing
a short game in a long game here right
the short game is how do I start getting
in touch with these emotions in a way
that isn't destructive and then there's
the long game which is
if I don't do it now then what am I
going to do continue to constrict it for
the rest of my life like there's a risk
involved right so you have to risk
a little destruction now
to get to a place where the anger is
clear and and moves easily and is fluid
and right is enjoyable
um but there's some tricks to it and the
tricks are
the first trick is don't believe the
emotion
don't not believe it either it's like
it's like when you're having the emotion
the important thing is to see yourself
as an actor playing the part of you
having an emotional experience
so it's like
an actor always knows it's not their
emotion even even if they get caught up
in it for a while they know there's some
part of their Consciousness that knows
that the story is a story it's not true
so it's it's about keeping that aspect
of your of your awareness awake
so that you just know like oh this
emotion is is just moving through me
it's not personal but it's also
allowing that emotional experience
um in and and that requires like letting
the emotion be garbly you know so it's
like intellect speaks like this it's
like a plus b equals c and b equals D
therefore a plus d equals c that's how
logic talks the way anger talks is
oh right that's it I got it that's how
anger speaks
and if you believe all the garbly googly
glue of anger like that person's an
and that person did this to me
blah blah blah blah then you're never
gonna get to that Clarity if you don't
allow all that garbly glue you also
won't get to the clarity
so
it's this like interesting thing of
listening to emotions in a different way
than you listen to logic
and if you start repressing it say well
I know it's really not them it's really
me and I I know that they're trying
their best or blah blah blah all that
kind of stuff doesn't allow the full
expression of the emotion so you don't
get to the clarity
so trick is not to listen to the story
to see it as non-personal to see
yourself as an actor just having it move
through it's kind of like going to the
bathroom right you just
it's not a personal thing it's just
happening and then the last part is to
just not do it at anybody and this is
the most critical thing is don't do it
at people
and that most people think of anger like
don't get angry at the person I'm
speaking to that but I'm also speaking
to sadness people get sad at people all
the time you know to try to create
manipulation or guilt or whatever it is
I'm gonna get sad at you too
make it so that you change your
your thing so you're never using your
emotions to try to get someone else to
change or afraid of people yeah exactly
this is unsafe and exactly
that's exactly it yeah you're speaking
to feeling these emotions coming up
within us and then like kind of viewing
it as we are an actor acting out the
emotion that's coming up within us and
it sounded like that could apply also
interpersonally or if if our partner is
coming at us with a lot of anger
recognizing like oh they're playing the
part of their anger right now
and I don't need to take everything they
say personally
um and I could actually hold space for
this to occur so they can find their
Clarity behind it
yeah absolutely and that's a lot easier
if you are good with your anchor right
if you're if you're like I love my anger
I can't wait for my anger to arise
because every time it does I find out
some boundary that I haven't been
drawing I find out some way I haven't
been being clear I love my anger and
then you see somebody else get angry
you're like oh I love that too and when
somebody sees you love their anger man
that anger changes you know they're like
like it happens with me and people are
like God damn it Joe and I'm like oh
yeah you're angry come on tell me about
it I want to hear this I see that you I
see that you feel alone and I see that
you feel rejected and I don't want that
let me hear what's going on with you
right
and that changes their anger it just
changes it right so you're speaking to
the like the short and the long game
that's being played and so like I think
a lot of the a lot of fear of letting
our emotions fly is that we'll become
worthless or unproductive or you know
just the the last straw will happen if
we're if we're deep in a relationship
and you know we're just like oh man but
if one more outburst and they're just
done with me so I've gotta suppress this
what happens if we just let our emotions
fly all the time again just not at
people to put your emotion at somebody
to try to get them to change with your
emotions subconsciously or consciously
it's emotional abuse
it's not healthy for them and if it's
happening to you draw a boundary and say
I don't want that like I'm happy to
listen to your emotions if I give you
permission
but otherwise I don't want the emotion
at me
so I I just say don't don't do that
without permission
and if you are getting your emotions out
in a by yourself or with a close friend
and you're doing it then they're not
going to leak right the reason that
somebody gets angry at somebody else is
because they haven't gotten angry by
themselves they haven't it takes them a
while to build that kind of anger
there's lots of time before that that
you can release it
so go release your anger and then talk
to the person go mourn and then talk to
your wife about what you need from the
relationship go get really really scared
and then talk to your boss about the
race that you want right like do the
thing that you have the emotional
experience and then go take the action
so that's it just just feel it how do
you how do you recognize in the in the
moment when you're in this like a spin
cycle and you're like oh God this
this person did this or whatever or oh
what should I do here I don't know what
to do I don't know what to do how do you
recognize that like what's the hook to
get you out of that Loop to remember
this exactly what you said so if
you are doing one of three things you
mentioned two of them if you notice that
you keep on looping on the same thought
it means there's an emotion that you're
not feeling
um if you are not clear about a decision
you need to make then there's an emotion
you're not feeling
if you are judgmental towards another
person there is an emotion you're not
feeling
um
a little bit more
if I judge you for
being angry I don't want to feel out of
control or if I judge you for being
angry it's because I don't want to feel
um
the potential that I have to lose you so
lost
if I judge you for being uptight it's
because I don't want to feel controlled
or I don't want to feel rigid
so every time we have a judgment it's
just a way to suppress an emotion
which is what makes our decision making
really screwed up because if you're
judging very different than discernment
right discernment is just a knowing of
Distinction but if it's uh if it's
judgment then you're not clear you're
not looking at the data clearly you have
preconceived notions of the data and
then you can't make great decisions or
preconceived notions of intent on behalf
of the other correct that's right and
then the last one another like cool
trick is whenever you see your your mind
in binary thinking you know I either
have to buy the car and not buy the car
instead of I could buy that car I could
buy that car from 10 different people I
could buy that car with different
packages I can buy that car in different
colors I could buy that car in six
months whenever you're in that binary
black or white thinking then you know
that there's some fear there that's not
being felt so let's get into a little
bit deeper we've been talking a lot
about the feeling side of this what is
what do you mean by figuring it out what
are some other ways that that can happen
and that we can get kind of caught in
that Loop
figuring it out at its most essential is
just your intellect it's to strategize
it's to try to solve the puzzle it's
like
this is the outcome that I want how do I
get there
that is the intellect and is really good
at that but that's what that's what it
means when you're figuring when you're
intellectualizing that's what it means
it's you the some people say it's like
in your head some people you know call
it being tactical and there's some
really great uses for that it's not a
bad thing
just a lot better when you're not
avoiding an emotion using it
yeah it sounds like the the purpose of
the intellect here is to take a very
narrowly framed context of assumptions
and goals and then figure out the path
from A to B
but then the emotions are what is
creating those assumptions to begin with
and the goals correct and and the risk
profile elaborate on that now like if
you
really really really don't want to lose
your girlfriend
yeah then your risk tolerance is really
low if you're like I could do it under
certain circumstances then you're more
likely to be yourself right so
um how madly you don't want to feel the
emotion really affects your risk profile
yeah that makes sense but we should like
figure some things out like wouldn't it
be kind of silly to just shut that part
of us off and never use that part of our
intelligence yeah I absolutely like I
wouldn't want to build a bridge without
the intellect
I wouldn't want to you know you have
this conversation without the intellect
I would assume that would be horrible to
listen to
so yeah intellect is a beautiful amazing
thing it's just recognizing its
incompleteness there's a
girdle's theory of mathematical
incompleteness which is basically a
logical proof that all sets of logic are
either incomplete or they are based on a
postulate
so it basically proves logic can't be
logical
my favorite part of that is that he
proved it with logic he actually used
logic to prove the incompleteness of
logic and it couldn't have been done
without logic right yeah Aristotle did
it earlier in a different thing but he
didn't do it with the same kind of logic
without the math you know so it's a
beautiful thing and and our postulates
our emotions that's what our postulates
are in our logical way of thinking it's
why people can logically justify
absolute opposite things
it's not because their rationale is good
or bad it's because they have different
postulates behind their rationale right
so figure stuff out is great and and the
intellect is beautiful even in the
spiritual journey or the transformative
Journey
the intellect is beautiful it's great
for deconstructing itself very good at
hanging out in a way that allows you to
describe what's happened usually after
you've gone through it right usually
what I notice is that it's not like
here's the description of it and now I
go through it it's more like here's a
description of it that can give me some
sort of framework that I can rest on
that I don't completely understand then
I go through it and then maybe like a
month later I can describe it so the
intellect's really good for that as well
so it's I mean I love the intellect it's
I love watching great minds at work and
at the same time it can become the Trap
again too you can have you can have like
this like major emotional movement or
transformative experience or you know
what not and then your intellect will
step in and be like okay so what
actually happened let me make sense of
that and like oh this was the childhood
thing that happened to me and then that
was what I felt in this meeting and then
all that interact and then this way and
then you're like oh cool now I have a
model for understanding myself and then
once again you've created this limited
system that may be more useful than the
previous one but then eventually we'll
reach its limits of understanding and
prediction yeah that's that's right my
words for that are every Epiphany is the
innocent beginning of a rut right that
every Epiphany they're so important
um to have these epiphanies but what's
really important about them is that it
blows everything up
and then we reconstruct it and then
a new constraint is found and we need to
have that new Epiphany to deconstruct or
to destroy the the old Epiphany and the
old rut
and that's just how that's how
transformation works that's how
Evolution works
and it's it's a beautiful thing and yes
there comes a point in this development
where you can
see
um that every single thought that you
have is both true and not true
it comes at pointing development where
you can't believe any one of your
thoughts
and if you have emotional Clarity when
that development point hits
you become incredibly clear if you don't
have emotional Clarity you can use that
same
beauty of seeing both sides of every
coin as a way to become indecisive as a
way to beat yourself up as a way to
limit yourself
as a way to continue to constrict
emotions so
but yeah logic is a beautiful thing it's
just really important to know what it's
good at and what it's not good at right
now like what we've been talking about
has been very much about the personal
development Journey but I think we could
actually apply this very very easily to
um to business for example say product
iterations you know every every Epiphany
from your product research or your your
market research to come up with a new
Direction could it easily become the new
rut that you've find yourself spending
six months in a million dollars
investing in right or a government that
had a great Epiphany about a police
force and then now that police force
Epiphany is a rut that needs to be
recreated and re a new Epiphany for as
an example right there's a thousand
examples of how the solution of
yesterday is the rut of today yeah and
and we villainize it and we make it bad
instead of just being like Oh we need a
new iteration yeah that's it yeah okay
maybe we don't need one president with a
lot of power right or maybe we need a
financial
democracy instead of a voting democracy
or maybe we you know thousands of new
opinions some would argue we already
have that and it's a bad thing right
exactly that's another one right so so
it's like this it's like every one of
our epiphanies everything that locks us
down was an epiphany at one point was
somebody's realization at one point the
CEO of Netflix he in his per first
business he he claims that he made
everything idiot proof and then only
idiots would come and work for him and
so in Netflix he keeps a certain amount
of chaos a certain amount of creativity
a certain amount of
risk involved so that people who want
smart challenges people who want to be
cutting edge who want to have more
freedom show up and work for him and
that's more important than having things
idiot-proof for him and it's that same
thought process of like what's more
important is that we're constantly
iterating that we are
seen through the logic that we used and
relied on yeah so that's a great example
of how how I like a leader of personal
Journey can then show up in their
company because for for a CEO to get to
the point where they can just say hey
you know what like
let's just let some chaos happen they
have to learn to feel that loss of
control and welcome it oh yeah so this
is everything right so if I
let me give a really sharp example
almost every high-powered CEO I know has
an issue of a feeling alone and B having
a steep feeling of self-reliance that
they need to rely on themselves
[Music]
and at the bottom of that emotional
slide is this deep sense of helplessness
that they didn't want to feel you don't
learn to be self-reliant unless there
was a point when you had this deep sense
of helplessness that you didn't want to
feel right maybe it was an alcoholic dad
or maybe it was getting really poor or
whatever it was that sense of
helplessness and saying I am not going
to feel that again is what propels them
into this incredible place in their life
it's also the thing that needs to be
destroyed if they're going to be great
leaders
[Music]
right and they need to feel that
helplessness they need to go into like
that complete helplessness and I don't
think it's any mistake that the CEO of
Netflix had to go through the
helplessness of losing a company
to get to the place of allowing that
feeling of helplessness all the time
because somewhere in that Journey he
found out that that helplessness was
just a feeling
and it had an incredible intelligence
behind it and it was trying to tell him
something
and it no longer needed to be
avoided it needed to be looked for and
and to be excited when it shows up
what's an example of that happening in
your life
I have children
[Laughter]
having children is like uh is like
getting a deep tissue massage if you
resist you are screwed right like you
have to constantly
feel your own helplessness in your
children yeah like as an example of that
I think you have to feel that
helplessness
for me I think the first journey of it
was abandonment it was like feeling
emotionally abandoned I was recreating
that experience over and over again
until I felt it
which is a really important part of this
emotional journey is that
my example is abandonment so I'll use
that as the example is you know I felt
for whatever reason in my childhood
emotionally abandoned and I didn't want
to feel it so I created a whole world to
not feel that but in the way I created
that whole world like everybody I
re-introduced it over and over and over
again this is why we all have that
friend who's been dating the same person
six times in a row right and it's not
the same person as in like it's it's
like the same person in a different body
with a different background but wow you
just picked seven different men who all
cheated on you how did you ever do that
right
so I recreated people who would
emotionally abandon me over and over
again until I fell in love with the
abandonment and once I fell in love with
it my system didn't need to recreate it
I had found homeostasis right so if I
there's an emotion that I wasn't allowed
to feel I recreate that feeling over and
over again
until I fully allow that feeling and
then I don't need to recreate it and the
other way to say this is the things that
we are most scared of are the things
that we're subtly inviting into our life
so if we're most scared of feeling
helpless we will invite helplessness
unconsciously into our life
so that we have that opportunity to yeah
I've got a great example for that it's
like my growing up I always felt like I
was being tightly controlled by like
school and society and that control made
me feel helpless and I just didn't want
to feel helpless anymore so I developed
exactly what you described that like
self-reliance complex and that
self-reliance complex then made me feel
like I had to be in control of
everything that I was doing and made it
difficult sometimes to cooperate or
collaborate
on something that I wasn't going to have
like the full Reigns over
uh which would often lead me to feel you
know alone and helpless yeah that's
right that's exactly a beautiful that's
exactly how it works and then once we're
like cool helplessness and all of a
sudden we don't recreate the conditions
because our body has just found that
homeostasis it's like oh okay I'm back
to balance yeah I think addiction has a
lot to do with that as well
um that feeling of like avoiding
helplessness
feeling like you can control something
like for example like a gambling
addiction a lot of what I've I've heard
about like slot machine addiction is
it's not necessarily that they
those addicted things that they're going
to be winning any money they know
they're not they know the math they're
not stupid but the feeling of just
hitting the buttons and experiencing the
the spin occur like they're just in a
very tight looped system where the rules
are
almost like they're designed to look
like they're almost figure outable
but they're not yeah I think there's
definitely a lot of emotional avoidance
and addiction
um oftentimes it's shame like I've heard
a saying that says shame is the locks of
the chains of bad habits
um shame seems to be a big part of an
addiction cycle and there's others as
well but definitely there's a big
emotional component to addiction Cycles
there's also some physical and
neurological components as well but
emotional avoidance is a huge part of
of it if you could just lift the shame
out of people then most of the
addictions would fall away so as as we
move through our lives and start feeling
more and more of these emotions that
we've been repressing and what does that
development look like emotional
development looks pretty clearly the
same way for different people but the
starting points are different but the
earliest starting point that you can get
to is just recognizing the emotions you
have
so it's just knowing that you are
constantly in an emotional state as long
as you're conscious
people think some of them especially if
there's been more emotional abuse or
emotional repression in the home people
will have a very specific
experience of not being able to feel
their emotions and so this is um similar
to somebody who's been physically abused
if you've been physically abused and I
put a quarter in your hand or a key in
your hand you won't actually know which
one you're holding because you've
learned to cut off your sensations of
your body
emotionally you might also have learned
how to cut off those Sensations so the
first thing is to feel that sensation
and that is just to identify that what
the emotional experience is happening at
every given moment because the way that
we feel right now is slightly different
than the way we feel right now which is
slightly different than the way we feel
right now
and so identifying those emotions is a
really good thing it's a great Epiphany
it will also become a rut later on but
it's a really great first stage and then
the second stage is
an expression of that emotion so to
really allow those emotions to be
expressed through the body through words
in a way that is not at anybody
so it's just having that kind of full
expression of emotion and then that
moves into kind of an emotional inquiry
which is how does it feel in your body
and what color is it and where is it in
my body and how dense is it and it's a
literal like what is the physicality of
my emotions and having a deep inquiry
into that and then also having a deep
inquiry of oh when I relate to my
emotions differently how do they work
when I'm angry at my emotions what does
that do when I'm in love with my
emotions what does that do when I am
trying to get rid of my emotions what
does that do when I am
tickling my emotions what does that do
so you're literally playing with
different relationships you can have
with your emotions and then there comes
this place where you're just deeply in
love with your emotions and then emotion
emotions become very fluid
and it becomes just like this
beautiful flow of life it's so exciting
and so pleasurable to feel your
emotional fluidity and it allows for
just very crisp decision making and it
allows for very decisive action
to have that emotional flow and to give
you a great example of this Epiphany rut
thing
um I did not have a lot of emotional
awareness when I started this workout
all in my 20s and
I got into this point where I realized
how I'm having emotions and one day I
don't know a decade later or something I
was saying to somebody I'm like
um I'm feeling angry right now and they
said no you're not and I said excuse me
and they're like you're naming an
emotion so you don't have to feel it
they were so right I was like son of a
gun you know like I've named it so
I don't have to feel it and and the
thing that was once freeing to be able
to see it and name it had become the new
constraint
and then I realized oh the feeling of it
is a completely different thing and and
and when you feel the emotion it's all
about letting the body just move it's
like
it's like dancing with no
um without being self-conscious it's
just like your emotions know how to move
your body
your emotions know what to do if they
don't fake it they'll figure it out
don't judge them don't tell them how
they're supposed to look that's not
crying that's not fear so many people
who aren't good at crying when I see
them cry for the first time they think
they're like that can't be real tears
because it doesn't feel like that one
time I cried but there's 20 different
ways of crying you know you can cry of
joy you can cry of sadness you can cry
of grief you can cry
in a way like when you're yawning
there's so many different ways that
sadness expresses and it's not your job
to judge them it's your job to just like
watch it like uh like you would watch
the Grand Canyon right yeah it seems
like each each stage here is like a meta
awareness a new level of meta awareness
around around our emotions the first
level being just recognizing that there
is emotions here and that we are not
just a logical machine figuring things
out and that there is always a
emotional context that that exists for
us and then we get deeper into that and
we start to be in the emotional context
not just recognizing that one's there
but we flow in it and with it and then
another level seems to be the meta
awareness around the emotion being like
oh wow okay as I'm letting this anger
move through me I'm actually clarifying
my boundary or as I'm letting the
sadness move through me I'm I'm grieving
grieving the loss of something tangible
or even just an idea and that this whole
process of letting these emotions move
through us is actually changing the
assumptions goals and the context and
you know the risk profile of all of our
future logical thoughts exactly we are
limited everybody talks about limited
thoughts but in reality
The Limited thoughts have a deep
correlation with the way we limit our
emotional reality it's almost as though
the thoughts are just the tip of the
emotional Iceberg like they are actually
a part of the emotions they're just the
emotions that are most finely
uh the part of the emotion that is
working in the finest detail it depends
on the perspective which is the tip of
the iceberg and which is the underside
of the iceberg but what I do know is
that they are in an intricate dance and
when one side isn't working the other
side definitely helps so it sounds like
what we've what you've been saying all
along is that you know this the
intellect is very useful and we do we we
do want to use it to figure stuff out
but first we want to get our emotional
context right and
allow our emotions to shift us into the
place
that is most aligned with our reality in
Our Moment
and then in that space figure stuff out
yeah I wouldn't use the word right but
but generally directionally that feels
very right
um I would say it's uh when your
emotions are blocked or when you're
trying to deeply avoid an emotion then
your decision making can't be clear it's
just as simple as that so
feel the emotion whenever you can and
that allows for clarity and it doesn't
need to be any more complicated than
that and see it as a process that maybe
at the beginning when you realize that
you're not clear on something and the
there's emotion involved
it's going to take a while to get
through it
but pretty soon as you get older in in
the journey then the emotions flow so
quickly and the recognition of it can
just make the whole thing really really
clear really quick you know it's it's
common for me on a daily basis to have a
cry or shake or get angry it's relieving
of stress it changes my neurochemistry
it clarifies my decision it doesn't take
but five minutes it's just just moves
it's almost like you could do a daily
emotional yoga
indeed I did for years yeah indeed it I
did it for I didn't I don't think I ever
did it daily but maybe like five times a
week I would take 20 to 30 minutes to do
literally emotional yoga where I would
feel everything that I was not feeling
and teach my body how to feel it and how
to accept it and how to
unlock right because as the emotions
start to be felt in the musculature
unlocks and then you can feel it deeper
yeah and your cortisol levels will shift
and your metabolism will you know update
and start
releasing the right right releasing an
amount of energy into your body that is
appropriate at the moment yeah that's
right and the other thing to know is
that each of these emotional streams
that I talked about like anger so
there's anger that's constricted is
constricted in a lot of ways but the
and the unrestricted anger is that
Clarity and determination
the unrestricted sadness is
um a deep joy and
the unconstricted fear is excitement
right there's a saying that says
excitement is uh fear with the breath or
the fear is excitement without the
breath
it's a from an acting school and it's
like each of these things when they're
not resisted become something very very
different right and grief is a
celebration of what you've had yeah
right yeah absolutely yeah I mean and
grief is kind of this anger sadness fear
all together wrapped up in one
the feelings of these things coming
through you when they're unresisted
change deeply so you you don't even
can't even recognize them and they start
blending all into one emotional state
it's like one stream that's happening so
this is this all seems to really kind of
tie into something that we were working
on a lot in your courses which is this
phenomenon where we can understand
something intellectually you know
something about our story or about our
about our traumas or somebody could be
listening to this podcast and understand
it intellectually and we can still not
get it all the way until we've had the
emotional movement to consolidate it
yeah this is really something that
happens in coaching all the time right
you get somebody who intellectually
understands yes okay my boss is managing
me and I'm angry
um but I intellectually really really
understand that they're they're trying
to get me to do my best work but I'm
feeling it as criticism
and so intellectually they understand
that their boss wants the best for them
uh but emotionally it's just criticism
it's just what Dad was doing you know
when the person I'm coaching was 13 or
whatever it is
and then once they get it emotionally
when they grok it in their whole body
then all of a sudden it's like oh thanks
so much for the feedback I appreciate it
I really appreciate you wanting me to do
my best work here
and so it's on so many levels it's it's
it's even grocking complex ideas in your
body completely has an emotional
component to it
so if somebody sees like oh here's this
really complex
marketing thought process
and they don't fully understand it they
can intellectually get it but they don't
it's not second nature it's not just
what they do it means that there's some
emotional component of that marketing
something like oh my God I'm going to be
asking people for stuff or oh my God
marketing is bad and dirty there's some
emotional component of it that when that
emotional component is fully felt then
then it's understood it might not be
used it might be used but it's it can't
even be fully understood until that
emotional component has been felt yeah
until your emotions align with it it
reminds me of Einstein where you know
for him the theory of relativity was a
spiritual experience to be
like working in yeah and many many
scientists and prominent scientists have
said have said similar things
um Feynman for example absolutely yeah
there's a
you cannot have certain ideas without
certain emotional Clarity you cannot
have certain ideas or certain epiphanies
without an experiential understanding of
what's going on right you can't do the
theory of relativity until you see
through your own limited perception of
time that Society has has taught you
right or even your your senses your
physical body has taught you yes that's
right right so so how do how do we then
stop resisting these emotions what is
what are some takeaways from from all of
this that that are some concrete
practices yeah so first of all if you
are resisting emotions and you try to
stop that's more resistance as we've
already talked about so
love the resistance that's the most
important thing
um
you know fake it till you make it my
personal story was you know I looked in
the um
in a photo album when I was I don't know
what I was like 20 something years old
and I saw a picture of me crying and I
realized that oh my parents weren't
comfortable with the emotions I was
having
because they were taught to be
uncomfortable with their own emotions
and so one of the ways to make sure that
I didn't like make everybody
uncomfortable was to tease me
around my emotions and so they would at
one point they took a picture of me and
then they put it in the photo album and
I found this picture and I was like huh
that's probably it was a picture of me
crying and this picture was you could
see both me crying and you could see me
kind of dumbfounded that I was having a
picture taken of me and
and I was like oh that's probably why I
haven't cried in 14 years you know so I
I put a picture of it on the on my desk
and I was like okay I'm gonna learn how
to cry but a year later I hadn't cried
so then I was like okay I'm determined I
need to go and really give this thing a
go and cry and so I went out into the
woods and I went like to a far away
Trail then I went off Trail for three
miles so that nobody could see me cry
that I had that much shame around it
and then I would just fake crying and I
did that for like three months I would
just fake it and then and then all of a
sudden it just happened started
happening for real
and when it happened it was such a
relief that I let it happen for four
days you know I could have stopped it
but I was crying like when I was
brushing my teeth I was like my body was
just like
years of tension just evaporating in
days
and then all of a sudden I had a deeper
access to my tears and then that led
deeper and deeper accesses to my tears
and then that led to oh every single
heartbreak of mine increases my capacity
to love I cannot wait for more
heartbreak like even just saying that
it's just in that in itself it makes me
want to cry how blessed I am for loving
heartbreak and for seeing how much
freedom to love that gives me
hmm that's beautiful
yeah well this has been a great episode
thank you very much Joe and we'll catch
you again next week yeah man what a
pleasure to be with you
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]
foreign